You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?
Resolved; resolved.
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.
Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.
For the gods know I speak this in hunger for bread,
not in thirst for revenge.
He's a very dog to the commonalty.
Consider you what services he has done for his country?
Very well; and could be content to give him good report for it
but that he pays himself with being proud.
Nay, but speak not maliciously.
I say unto you, what he hath done famously,
he did it to that end.
Though soft-conscienced men
can be content to say it was for his country,
he did it to please his mother and to be partly proud,
which he is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
What he cannot help in his nature
you account a vice in him.
What shouts are these?
The other side of the city is risen.
Soft.
Who comes here?
Worthy Menenius Agrippa,
one that hath always loved the people.
Where go you with bats and clubs?
The matter?
Speak, I pray you.
Our business is not unknown to the senate.
They have had inkling this fortnight
what we intend to do,
which now we'll show them in deeds.
Why, masters, my good friends,
mine honest neighbors,
will you undo yourselves?
We cannot, sir.
We are undone already.
I tell you, friends,
most charitable care have the patricians of you.
Care for us?
True, indeed.
They ne'er cared for us, yet suffer us to famish,
and their storehouses crammed with grain;
make edicts for usury, to support usurers;
repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich;
and provide more piercing statutes daily
to chain up and restrain the poor.
If the wars eat us not up, they will,
and there's all the love they bear us.
Either you must confess yourselves wondrous malicious
or be accused of folly.
I shall tell you a pretty tale.
It may be you have heard it, but since it serves my purpose,
I'll venture to stale it a little more.
Well, I'll hear it, sir, yet you must not think
to fob off our disgrace with a tale.
But, and it please you, deliver.
There was a time when all the body's members
rebelled against the belly,
thus accused it that only like a gulf it did remain
in the midst of the body, idle and unactive,
still cupboarding the viand,
never bearing like labor with the rest,
where the other instruments did see and hear, devise,
instruct, walk, feel, and mutually participate,
did minister unto the appetites and affection
common of the whole body.
The belly answered
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
Sir, I shall tell you.
With a kind of smile,
which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus
for, look you,
I may make the belly smile as well as speak.
It tauntingly replied to the discontented members,
the mutinous parts that envied his receipt,
even so most fitly as you malign our senators
for that they are not such as you.
Your belly's answer, what?
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
not rash like his accusers, and thus answered:
"True is it, my incorporate friends,"
quoth he, "That I receive the general food at first,
"which you do live upon, and fit it is,
"because I am the storehouse and the shop of the whole body.
"But, if you do remember,
"I send it through the rivers of your blood,
"even to the court, the heart, to the seat of the brain,
"and through the cranks and offices of man,
"the strongest nerves and small inferior veins
"from me receive that natural competency
"whereby they live,
and though that all at once, you, my good friends
this said the belly, mark me
Ay, sir; well, well.
"Though all at once cannot see what I do deliver out to each,
"yet I can make my audit up,
"that all from me do back receive the flour of all,
and leave me but the bran."
What say you to it?
It was an answer.
How apply you this?
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
and you the mutinous members.
For examine their counsels and their cares,
digest things rightly touching the weal of the common.
You shall find no public benefit that you receive,
but it proceeds or comes from them to you
and no way from yourselves.
What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
that rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
make yourselves scabs?
We have ever your good word.
He that will give good words to thee
will flatter beneath abhorring.
What would you have, you curs, that like nor peace nor war?
The one affrights you; the other makes you proud.
He that trusts to you,
where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
where foxes, geese.
You are no surer, no,
than is the coal of fire upon the ice
or hailstone in the sun.
Your virtue is to make him worthy whose offense subdues him
and curse that justice did it.
Who deserves greatness deserves your hate.
Trust ye?
Hang ye.
What's the matter
that in these several places of the city
you cry against the noble senate,
who, under the gods, keep you in awe,
which else would feed on one another?
What's their seeking?
For corn at their own rates,
whereof, they say, the city is well stored.
Hang them!
They say!
They'll sit by the fire
and presume to know what's done in the capitol;
who's like to rise, who thrives and who declines;
side factions and give out conjectural marriages;
making parties strong and feebling such as stand
not in their liking below their cobbled shoes.
They say there's grain enough.
What says the other troop?
O, they're dissolved.
Hang them!
They said they were an-hungry,
sighed forth proverbs, that hunger broke stone walls,
that dogs must eat, that meat was made for mouths,
that the gods sent not corn for the rich men only.
With these shreds, they vented their complainings,
which being answered and a petition granted them,
a strange one贸
to break the heart of generosity,
and make bold power look pale.
They threw their caps
as they would hang them on the horns of the moon,
shouting their emulation.
What is granted them?
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms
of their own choice.
One's Junius Brutus, Sicinius Velutus,
and I know not贸 'Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroofed the city,
ere so prevailed with me.
It will, in time, win upon power
and throw forth greater themes for insurrection's arguing.
This is strange.
Go, get you home, you fragments!
What's the matter?
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
I am glad on it.
Then we shall have means to vent our musty superfluity.
They have a leader, Tullus Aufidius,
that will put you to it.
I sin in envying his nobility,
and were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.
You have fought together.
Were half to half the world by the ears and he.
Upon my party, I'd revolt only to make my wars with him.
He is a lion that I am proud to hunt.
Then, worthy Marcius, attend upon Cominius to these wars.
It is your former promise.
Sir, it is, and I am constant.
Titus Lartius,
thou shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff?
Stand'st out.
No, Caius Marcius, I'll lean upon one crutch
and fight with t'other, ere stay behind this business.
O, true-bred.
Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?
He has no equal.
When we were chosen tribunes for the people贸
Marked you his lip and eyes?
Nay, but his taunts.
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.
Be-mock the modest moon.
And the present wars devour him.
He is grown too proud to be so valiant.
Such a nature, tickled with good success,
disdains the shadow which he treads on at noon.
But I do wonder his insolence
can brook to be commanded under Cominius.
Fame, at the which he aims,
in whom already he's well graced,
cannot better be held nor more attained
than by a place below the first,
for what miscarries shall be the general's fault,
though he perform to the utmost of a man,
and giddy censure will then cry out of Marcius,
"O if he had borne the business."
Besides, if things go well,
opinion that so sticks on Marcius
shall of his demerits rob Cominius.
So your opinion is, Aufidius,
that they of Rome are entered in our counsels
and know how we proceed.
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought on in this state
that could be brought to bodily act
ere Rome had circumvention?
"Tis not four days gone since I heard thence."
These are the words.
I think I have the letter here; yes, here it is.
"They have pressed a power,
"but it is not known whether for east or west.
"The dearth is great, the people mutinous,
"and it is rumored, Cominius, Marcius, your old enemy,
"who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
"and Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
"these three lead on this preparation whither 'tis bent.
"Most likely, 'tis for you.
Consider of it."
Our army's in the field.
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready to answer us.
Nor did you think it folly
to keep your great pretenses veiled
till when they needs must show themselves,
which in the hatching, it seemed,
appeared to Rome.
By the discovery, we shall be shortened in our aim,
which was to take in many towns
ere almost Rome should know we were afoot.
Noble Aufidius,
take your commission, hie you to your bands.
Let us alone to guard Corioli.
If they set down before us,
for the remove, bring up your army,
but, I think, you'll find they've not prepared for us.
O, doubt not that; I speak from certainties.
I leave your honors.
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
'tis sworn between us
we shall ever strike till one can do no more.
I pray thee, daughter,
sing or express yourself in a more comfortable sort.
If my son were my husband,
I should freelier rejoice in that absence
wherein he won honor
than in the embracements of his bed
where he would show most love.
When yet he was but tender-bodied
and the only son of my womb,
when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way,
when for a day of kings' entreaties
a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding,
I, considering how honor would become such a person,
was pleased to let him seek danger
where he was like to find fame.
To a cruel war I sent him from whence he returned,
his brows bound with oak.
I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not more in joy
at first hearing he was a man-child
than now in first seeing he'd proved himself a man.
But had he died in the business, madam, how then?
Then his good report should have been my son.
I therein would have found issue.
Hear me profess sincerely:
had I a dozen sons,
each in my love alike and none less dear
than thine and my good Marcius.
I had rather had eleven die nobly for their country
than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
Indeed, you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum.
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair,
as children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.
Methinks I see him stamp thus and call thus:
"Come on, you cowards.
You were got in fear, though you were born in Rome,"
his bloody brow with his mailed hand then wiping,
forth he goes贸
His bloody brow.
O, Jupiter, no blood.
Away, you fool.
It more becomes a man than gilt his trophy.
The breasts of Hecuba, when she did suckle Hector,
looked not lovelier than Hector's forehead
when it spit forth blood at Grecian sword, contemning.
Tell Valeria we are fit to bid her welcome.
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius.
He'll pluck Aufidius' head below his knee
and tread upon his neck.
My ladies both, good day to you.
Sweet madam.
I am glad to see your ladyship.
How do you both?
You are manifest housekeepers.
What are you sewing here?
A fine spot, in good faith.
How does your little son?
I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.
He'd rather see the swords and hear a drum
than look upon his schoolmaster.
On my word, the father's son.
I'll swear, 'tis a very pretty boy.
On my troth,
I looked upon him on Wednesday half an hour together.
Has such a confirmed countenance.
I saw him run after a gilded butterfly,
and when he caught it, he let it go again,
and after it again.
And over and over he comes.
And up again, catched it again.
Or whether his fall enraged him, or how 'twas,
he did so set his teeth and tear it.
O, I warrant, how he mammocked it.
One on 's father's moods.
Indeed; la, 'tis a noble child.
A crack, madam.
Come, lay aside your stitchery.
I must have you play the idle housewife
with me this afternoon.
No, good madam; I will not out of doors.
Not out of doors.
She shall; she shall.
Indeed, no, by your patience.
I'll not over the threshold
till my lord return from the wars.
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably.
Come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
I will wish her speedy strength and visit her with my prayers,
but I cannot go thither.
Why, I pray you?
'Tis not to save labor, nor that I want love.
You would be another Penelope.
Yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence
did but fill Ithaca full of moths.
Come; I would your cambric were sensible as your finger
that you might leave pricking it for pity.
Come, you shall go with us.
No, good madam, pardon me.
Indeed, I will not forth.
In truth, la, go with me,
and I'll tell you excellent news of your husband.
O, good madam, there can be none yet.
Verily, I do not jest with you.
There came news from him last night.
Indeed, madam?
In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth,
against whom Cominius the general is gone,
with one part of our Roman power.
Your lord and Titus Lartius are set down
before their city, Corioli.
They nothing doubt prevailing and to make it brief wars.
This is true, on mine honor.
And so, I pray, go with us.
Give me excuse, good madam.
I will obey you in everything hereafter.
Let her alone, lady.
As she is now, she will but disease our better mirth.
In troth, I think she would.
Summon the town.
Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?
No, nor a man that fears you less than he.
That's lesser than a little.
Hark you; far off.
There is Aufidius.
List what work he makes amongst your cloven army.
O, they are at it.
Their noise be our instruction.
Ladders, ho!
All the contagion of the south light on you,
you shames of Rome,
you herd of boils and plagues.
Plaster you o'er that you may be abhorred
farther than seen
and one infect another against the wind a mile.
You souls of geese that bear the shapes of men,
how have you run from slaves that apes would beat.
Pluto and hell.
All hurt behind, backs red and faces pale
with flight and agued fear.
Mend and charge home or, by the fires of heaven,
I'll leave the foe and make my wars on you.
Look to it.
What is become of Marcius?
Slain, sir, doubtless.
Following the fliers at the very heels,
with them he enters,
who, upon the sudden, clapped to their gates.
He is himself alone to answer all the city.
Look, sir.
'Tis Marcius.
Let's fetch him off or make remain alike.
Come I too late?
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabor
more than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue
from every meaner man.
Come I too late?
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others
but mantled in your own.
But how prevailed you?
Will the time serve to tell?
I do not think.
Where is the enemy?
Are you lords of the field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?
Marcius, we have at disadvantage fought
and did retire to win our purpose.
I do beseech you,
by all the battles wherein we have fought,
by the blood we have shed together,
by the vows we have made to endure friends,
that you directly set me against Aufidius and his Antiates
and that you not delay the present
but, filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
we prove this very hour.
Though I could wish you were
conducted to a gentle bath and balms applied to you,
yet dare I never deny your asking.
Take your choice of those that best can aid your action.
Those are they that most are willing.
If any such be here as it were sin to doubt
that love this painting wherein you see me smeared,
if any fear lesser his person than an ill report,
if any think brave death outweighs bad life
and that his country's dearer than himself,
let him alone, or so many so minded, wave thus
to express his disposition and follow Marcius.
O, me alone.
Make you a sword of me?
I'll fight with none but thee,
for I do hate thee worse than a promise breaker.
We hate alike.
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor more than thy fame and envy.
Fix thy foot.
Let the first budger die the other's slave,
and the gods doom him after.
If I fly, Marcius, holloa me like a hare.
Within these three hours, Tullus, alone I fought
in your Corioli walls and made what work I pleased.
'Tis not my blood wherein thou seest me masked,
for thy revenge wrench up thy power to the highest.
Wert thou the Hector that was the whip of thy bragged progeny.
Thou shouldst not 'scape me here.
The augurer tells me we shall have news tonight.
Good or bad?
Not according to the prayers of the people,
for they love not Marcius.
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
Pray you, who does the wolf love?
The lamb.
Ay, to devour him,
as the hungry plebeians would the noble Marcius.
He's a lamb indeed that baas like a bear.
He's a bear indeed that lives like a lamb.
You two are old men.
Tell me one thing that I shall ask you.
Well, sir.
In what enormity is Marcius poor
that you two have not in abundance?
He's poor in no one fault but stored with all.
Especially in pride.
Topping all others in boasting.
This is strange now.
Do you two know how you are censured here in the city,
I mean of us of the right-hand file; do you?
Why, how are we censured?
Because you talk of pride now.
Will you not be angry?
Well, well, sir.
Well?
Why, 'tis no great matter,
for a very little thief of occasion will rob you
of a great deal of patience.
Give your dispositions the reins and be angry at your pleasures,
at the least if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so.
You blame Marcius for being proud?
We do it not alone, sir.
I know you do very little alone for your helps are many,
or else your actions would grow wondrous single.
Your abilities are too infant-like
to do much alone.
You talk of pride.
O, that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks
and make but an interior survey of your good selves.
O, that you could.
What then, sir?
Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting, proud,
violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as any in Rome.
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
You know neither me, yourself, nor anything.
You are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs.
You'd wear out a good wholesome forenoon
hearing a cause
between an orange wife and a fosset-seller
and then rejourn the controversy of three pence
to a second day of audience.
But when you're hearing a matter between party and party,
if you chance to be pinched with the colic,
you make faces like mummers,
set up the bloody flag against all patience,
and, in roaring for a chamber pot,
dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled
by your hearing.
All the peace you make in their cause
is calling both the parties knaves.
You are a pair of strange ones.
God-den to your worships.
More of your conversation would infect my brain,
being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians.
I'll be bold to take my leave of you.
If I should tell thee over this thy day's work,
thou'd not believe thy deeds.
But I'll report it
where senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
in the end admire,
where ladies shall be frighted, and, gladly quaked, hear more,
where the dull tribunes that, with the fusty plebeians,
hate thine honors, shall say against their hearts,
"We thank the gods our Rome hath such a soldier."
Pray now, no more.
My mother, who has a charter to extol her blood,
when she does praise me, grieves me.
I have done as you have done, that's what I can,
induced as you have been, that's for my country.
He that has but effected his good will
hath overta'en mine act.
You shall not be the grave of your deserving.
Rome must know the value of her own.
Therefore, I beseech you, in sign of what you are,
not to reward what you have done before our army hear me.
I have some wounds upon me and they smart
to hear themselves remembered.
Should they not,
well might they fester against ingratitude
and tent themselves with death.
Of all the treasure in this field achieved and city,
we render you the tenth to be taken forth
before the common distribution at your only choice.
I thank you, General,
but cannot make my heart consent to take a bribe to pay my sword.
I do refuse it and stand upon my common part
with those that have beheld the doing.
May these same instruments,
which you profane, never sound more!
When drums and trumpets shall in the field prove flatterers,
let courts and cities all be made of false-faced soothing!
For that I have not washed my nose that bled
or foiled some debile wretch
which, without note, here's many else have done.
You shout me forth in acclamations hyperbolical,
as if I loved my little should be dieted
in praises sauced with lies.
Too modest are you,
more cruel to your good report
than grateful to us that give you truly.
By your patience, if against yourself you be incensed,
we'll put you,
like one that means his proper harm,
in manacles, then reason safely with you.
Therefore, be it known, as to us, to all the world,
that Caius Marcius wears this war's garland,
and from this time, for what he did before Corioli,
call him, with all the applause and clamor of the host,
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!
Coriolanus!
Bear the addition nobly ever.
I will go wash,
and when my face is fair,
you shall perceive whether I blush or no.
The gods begin to mock me.
I, that now refused most princely gifts,
am bound to beg of my lord general.
Take it; 'tis yours.
What is it?
I sometime lay here in Corioli at a poor man's house.
He used me kindly.
He cried to me.
I saw him prisoner.
But then Aufidius was within my view,
and wrath o'erwhelmed my pity.
I request you to give my poor host freedom.
O, well begged.
Were he the butcher of my son,
he should be free as is the wind.
Deliver him, Titus.
Marcius, his name?
By Jupiter, forgot.
I am weary.
Yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?
The town is ta'en.
'Twill be delivered back on good condition.
Condition.
I would I were a Roman,
for I cannot, being a Volsce, be that I am.
Condition.
What good condition can a treaty find
in the part that is at mercy?
Five times, Marcius, I've fought with thee.
So often hast thou beat me and wouldst do so, I think,
should we encounter as often as we eat.
By the elements, if e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
he's mine,
or I am his.
Mine emulation hath not that honor in it it had
for where I thought to crush him in an equal force.
True sword to sword,
I'll potch at him some way
or wrath or craft may get him.
He is the devil.
Bolder, though not so subtle.
My valor's poisoned with only suffering stain by him,
for him shall fly out of itself.
Nor sleep nor sanctuary,
being naked, sick, nor fane nor capitol,
the prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
embarquements all of fury,
shall lift up their rotten privilege
and custom against my hate to Marcius.
Where I find him,
were it at home, upon my brother's guard,
even there, against the hospitable canon,
would I wash my fierce hand in his heart.